docs/sphinx/source/introduction.rst, before:

*********************
Introduction
*********************

Python is well known for it's ability to handle *heterogeneous* data in containers such as lists.
But what if you need to interact with C++ containers such as ``std::vector<T>`` that require *homogeneous* data types?


This project is about converting Python containers (``list``, ``dict``, ``set``, ``tuple``) containing homogeneous types
to and from their C++ equivalent.


A Problematic Example
========================

Suppose that you have a Python list of floats and need to pass it to a C++ library that expects a ``std::vector<double>``.
If the result of that call modifies the C++ vector, or creates a new one, you need to return a Python list of floats
from the result.

Your code might look like this:

.. code-block:: cpp

    PyObject *example(PyObject *op) {
        std::vector<double> vec;
        // Populate the vector, function to be defined...
        write_to_vector(op, vec);
        // Do something in C++ with the vector
        // ...
        // Convert the vector back to a Python list.
        // Function to be defined...
        return read_from_vector(vec);
    }

What should the implementation of ``write_to_vector()`` and ``read_from_vector()`` look like?

The answer seems fairly simple; firstly ``write_to_vector`` converting a Python list to a C++ ``std::vector<double>``:

.. code-block:: cpp

    void write_to_vector(PyObject *op, std::vector<double> &vec) {
        vec.clear();
        for (Py_ssize_t i = 0; i < PyList_Size(op); ++i) {
            vec.push_back(PyFloat_AsDouble(PyList_GET_ITEM(op, i)));
        }
    }

And the inverse, ``read_from_vector`` creating a new Python list from a C++ ``std::vector<double>``:

.. code-block:: cpp

    PyObject *read_from_vector(const std::vector<double> &vec) {
        PyObject *ret = PyList_New(vec.size());
        for (size_t i = 0; i < vec.size(); ++i) {
            PyList_SET_ITEM(ret, i, PyFloat_FromDouble(vec[i]));
        }
        return ret;
    }


There is no error handling here and all errors are runtime errors.

However if you need to support other object types, say lists of ``int``, ``str``, ``bytes`` then each one needs a pair of hand written functions.
It gets worse when you want to support other containers such as (``tuple``, ``list``, ``set``, ``frozenset``, ``dict``).
Then you have to write individual conversion functions for all the combinations of object types *and* containers.
This is tedious and error prone.

Why This Project
=========================

This project makes extensive use of C++ templates, partial template specialisation and code generation to reduce
dramatically the amount of hand maintained code.
It also converts many runtime errors to compile time errors.

If we want to support a fairly basic set of types:

.. list-table:: Supported Object types.
   :widths: 30 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Python Type
     - C++ Type
   * - ``True``, ``False``
     - ``bool``
   * - ``int``
     - ``long``
   * - ``float``
     - ``double``
   * - ``bytes``
     - ``std::vector<char>``
   * - ``str``
     - ``std::string``

And a basic set of containers:

.. list-table:: Supported Containers.
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Python Type
     - C++ Type
   * - ``tuple``
     - ``std::vector``
   * - ``list``
     - ``std::vector``
   * - ``set``
     - ``std::unordered_set``
   * - ``frozenset``
     - ``std::unordered_set``
   * - ``dict``
     - ``std::unordered_map``

The number of conversion functions is worse than the cartesian product of the types and containers as in the case of a
dict the types can appear as either a key or a value.

The tables above would normally require 90 conversion functions to be written, tested and documented [#]_ .

This project simplifies this by using a mix of C++ templates and code generators to reduce this number to just **six** hand written functions for all 90 cases.

* Two C++ templates for Python ``tuple`` / ``list`` two way conversions for all types.
* Two C++ templates for Python ``set`` / ``frozenset`` two way conversions for all types.
* Two C++ templates for Python ``dict`` two way conversions for all type combinations.

These templates are fairly simple, comprehensible and, for simplicity, code generation is done with a Python script is used
to create the final functions.

Hand Written Functions
=============================

There are only six non-trivial hand written functions along with a much larger of generated functions that successively
specialise these functions.

As an example, here how the function is developed that converts a Python list of ``float`` to a C++ ``std::vector<double>``.

Converting a Python tuple or list to a C++ ``std::vector<T>``
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This generic function that converts unary Python indexed containers (``tuple`` and ``list``) to a C++ ``std::vector<T>``
for any type has this signature:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template<typename T,
            int (*PyObject_Check)(PyObject *),
            T (*PyObject_Convert)(PyObject *),
            int(*PyUnaryContainer_Check)(PyObject *),
            Py_ssize_t(*PyUnaryContainer_Size)(PyObject *),
            PyObject *(*PyUnaryContainer_Get)(PyObject *, size_t)>
    int
    generic_py_unary_to_cpp_std_vector(PyObject *op, std::vector<T> &vec);

This template has these parameters:

.. list-table:: ``generic_py_unary_to_cpp_std_vector()`` template parameters.
   :widths: 20 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Template Parameter
     - Notes
   * - ``T``
     - The C++ type of the objects in the target C++ container.
   * - ``PyObject_Check``
     - A pointer to a function that checks that any ``PyObject *`` in the Python container is the correct type, for example that it is a ``bytes`` object.
   * - ``PyObject_Convert``
     - A pointer to a function that converts any ``PyObject *`` in the Python container to the C++ type, for example from ``bytes`` -> ``std::vector<char>``.
   * - ``PyUnaryContainer_Check``
     - A pointer to a function that checks that the ``PyObject *`` argument is the correct container type, for example a ``tuple``.
   * - ``PyUnaryContainer_Size``
     - A pointer to a function that returns the size of the Python container.
   * - ``PyUnaryContainer_Get``
     - A pointer to a function that gets a ``PyObject *`` from the Python container at a given index.

And the function has the following parameters.

.. list-table:: ``generic_py_unary_to_cpp_std_vector()`` parameters.
   :widths: 20 20 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type
     - Name
     - Notes
   * - ``PyObject *``
     - ``op``
     - The Python container to read from.
   * - ``std::vector<T>``
     - ``vec``
     - The C++ to write to.

The return value is zero on success or non zero if there is a runtime error.
These errors could be:

* ``PyObject *op`` is not a container of the required type.
* An member of the Python container can not be converted to the C++ type ``T`` (``PyObject_Check`` fails).

Partial Specialisation to Convert a Python list to a C++ ``std::vector<T>``
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This template can be partially specialised for converting Python *lists* of any type to C++ ``std::vector<T>``.
This is hand written code but it is trivial by wrapping a single function call.

Note the use of the function pointers to ``py_list_check``, ``py_list_len`` and ``py_list_get``.
These are thin wrappers around existing functions or macros in ``"Python.h"``.

.. code-block:: cpp

    template<
        typename T,
        int (*PyObject_Check)(PyObject *),
        T (*PyObject_Convert)(PyObject *)
    >
    int generic_py_list_to_cpp_std_vector(PyObject *op, std::vector<T> &vec) {
        return generic_py_unary_to_cpp_std_vector<
            T,
            PyObject_Check,
            PyObject_Convert,
            &py_list_check,
            &py_list_len,
            &py_list_get>(
                op, vec
            );
    }


Generated Functions
=============================

These are created by a script that takes the cartesian product of object types and container types and creates functions for each container/object.
For example, to convert a Python ``list`` of ``float`` to a C++ ``std::vector<double>`` the following are created:

A base declaration in *auto_py_convert_internal.h*:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template<typename T>
    int
    py_list_to_cpp_std_vector(PyObject *op, std::vector<T> &container);

And a concrete declaration for each C++ target type ``T`` in *auto_py_convert_internal.h*:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template <>
    int
    py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<double>(PyObject *op, std::vector<double> &container);


And the concrete definition is in *auto_py_convert_internal.cpp*:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template <>
    int
    py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<double>(PyObject *op, std::vector<double> &container) {
        return generic_py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<double, &py_float_check, &py_float_to_cpp_double>(
            op, container
        );
    }


This is the function hierarchy for the code that converts Python lists and tuples to C++ ``std::vector<T>`` for all
object types.
Here is the function hierarchy for converting lists to C++ ``std::vector<T>``:

.. code-block:: none

                                    py_unary_to_cpp_vector       <--- Hand written
                                              |
                            /--------------------------\
                            |                          |             Hand written partial
            generic_py_list_to_cpp_std_vector       tuples...    <-- specialisation
                            |                          |             (one liners).
                            |                          |
                py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<T>          ...        <-- Generated
                            |                          |
            /-------------------------------\      /-------\
            |                               |      |       |         Generated declaration
    py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<double>      ...    ...     ...    <-- and implementation
                                                                     (one liners)

Usage
------

Using the concrete function is as simple as this:

.. code-block:: cpp

    using namespace Python_Cpp_Containers;
    // Create a PyObject* representing a list of Python floats.
    PyObject *op = PyList_New(3);
    PyList_SetItem(op, 0, PyFloat_FromDouble(21.0));
    PyList_SetItem(op, 1, PyFloat_FromDouble(42.0));
    PyList_SetItem(op, 2, PyFloat_FromDouble(3.0));

    // Create the output vector...
    std::vector<double> cpp_vector;

    // Template specialisation will automatically invoke the appropriate
    // function call.
    // It will be a compile time error if the container/type function
    // is not available.
    // At run time this will return zero on success, non-zero on failure,
    // for example if op is not a Python tuple or members of op can not be
    // converted to C++ doubles.
    int err = py_list_to_cpp_std_vector(op, cpp_vector);
    // Handle error checking...

    // Now convert back.
    // Again this will be a compile time error if the C++ type is not supported.
    PyObject *new_op  = cpp_std_vector_to_py_list(cpp_vector);
    // new_op is a Python list of floats.
    // new_op will be null on failure and a Python exception will have been set.







Converting a C++ ``std::vector<T>`` to a Python tuple or list
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The generic function signature looks like this:


.. code-block:: cpp

    template<typename T,
            PyObject *(*ConvertCppToPy)(const T &),
            PyObject *(*PyUnaryContainer_New)(size_t),
            int(*PyUnaryContainer_Set)(PyObject *, size_t, PyObject *)>
    PyObject *
    generic_cpp_std_vector_to_py_unary(const std::vector<T> &vec);





Alternatives
--------------------

`Buffer protocol <https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/buffer.html>`_

`multiprocessing.shared_memory <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.shared_memory.html#module-multiprocessing.shared_memory>`_


`numpy <https://numpy.org>`_ is a common example.


.. rubric:: Footnotes
.. [#] There are four unary containers (``tuple``, ``list``, ``set``, ``frozenset``).
    Each container/type combination requires two functions to give two way conversion from Python to C++ and back.
    Thus 4 (containers) * 5 (types) * 2 (way conversion) = 40 required functions.
    For ``dict`` there are five types but the key and the value can be either so 25 possible variations (any 2 out of 5).
    With two way conversion this means another 50 functions. This is a total of 90 functions.

Commit message:

WIP Add std::complex<double> as a supported type.
Really the only work to do this was to implement std::hash<std::complex<double>> and mimics the Python way if hashing a complex number.
Most of the work was adding the functional tests.
Now have 120 conversion functions.

Code gen output:

/Users/paulross/CLionProjects/PythonCppHomogeneousContainers/venv/bin/python /Users/paulross/CLionProjects/PythonCppHomogeneousContainers/src/py/code_gen.py
Target directory "/Users/paulross/CLionProjects/PythonCppHomogeneousContainers/src/cpy"
Writing declarations to "/Users/paulross/CLionProjects/PythonCppHomogeneousContainers/src/cpy/auto_py_convert_internal.h"
Wrote 1526 lines of code with 122 declarations.
Writing definitions to  "/Users/paulross/CLionProjects/PythonCppHomogeneousContainers/src/cpy/auto_py_convert_internal.cpp"
Wrote 1237 lines of code with 120 definitions.

Process finished with exit code 0

docs/sphinx/source/introduction.rst, after:

*********************
Introduction
*********************

Python is well known for it's ability to handle *heterogeneous* data in containers such as lists.
But what if you need to interact with C++ containers such as ``std::vector<T>`` that require *homogeneous* data types?


This project is about converting Python containers (``list``, ``dict``, ``set``, ``tuple``) containing homogeneous types
to and from their C++ equivalent.


A Problematic Example
========================

Suppose that you have a Python list of floats and need to pass it to a C++ library that expects a ``std::vector<double>``.
If the result of that call modifies the C++ vector, or creates a new one, you need to return a Python list of floats
from the result.

Your code might look like this:

.. code-block:: cpp

    PyObject *example(PyObject *op) {
        std::vector<double> vec;
        // Populate the vector, function to be defined...
        write_to_vector(op, vec);
        // Do something in C++ with the vector
        // ...
        // Convert the vector back to a Python list.
        // Function to be defined...
        return read_from_vector(vec);
    }

What should the implementation of ``write_to_vector()`` and ``read_from_vector()`` look like?

The answer seems fairly simple; firstly ``write_to_vector`` converting a Python list to a C++ ``std::vector<double>``:

.. code-block:: cpp

    void write_to_vector(PyObject *op, std::vector<double> &vec) {
        vec.clear();
        for (Py_ssize_t i = 0; i < PyList_Size(op); ++i) {
            vec.push_back(PyFloat_AsDouble(PyList_GET_ITEM(op, i)));
        }
    }

And the inverse, ``read_from_vector`` creating a new Python list from a C++ ``std::vector<double>``:

.. code-block:: cpp

    PyObject *read_from_vector(const std::vector<double> &vec) {
        PyObject *ret = PyList_New(vec.size());
        for (size_t i = 0; i < vec.size(); ++i) {
            PyList_SET_ITEM(ret, i, PyFloat_FromDouble(vec[i]));
        }
        return ret;
    }


There is no error handling here and all errors are runtime errors.

However if you need to support other object types, say lists of ``int``, ``str``, ``bytes`` then each one needs a pair of hand written functions.
It gets worse when you want to support other containers such as (``tuple``, ``list``, ``set``, ``frozenset``, ``dict``).
Then you have to write individual conversion functions for all the combinations of object types *and* containers.
This is tedious and error prone.

Why This Project
=========================

This project makes extensive use of C++ templates, partial template specialisation and code generation to reduce
dramatically the amount of hand maintained code.
It also converts many runtime errors to compile time errors.

If we want to support a fairly basic set of types:

.. list-table:: Supported Object types.
   :widths: 30 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Python Type
     - C++ Equivalent Type
   * - ``True``, ``False``
     - ``bool``
   * - ``int``
     - ``long``
   * - ``float``
     - ``double``
   * - ``complex``
     - ``std::complex<double>``
   * - ``bytes``
     - ``std::vector<char>``
   * - ``str``
     - ``std::string``

And a basic set of containers:

.. list-table:: Supported Containers.
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Python Type
     - C++ Type
   * - ``tuple``
     - ``std::vector``
   * - ``list``
     - ``std::vector``
   * - ``set``
     - ``std::unordered_set``
   * - ``frozenset``
     - ``std::unordered_set``
   * - ``dict``
     - ``std::unordered_map``

The number of conversion functions is worse than the cartesian product of the types and containers as in the case of a
dict the types can appear as either a key or a value.

The tables above would normally require 120 conversion functions to be written, tested and documented [#]_ .

This project simplifies this by using a mix of C++ templates and code generators to reduce this number to just **six** hand written functions for all 120 cases.

* Two C++ templates for Python ``tuple`` / ``list`` two way conversions for all types.
* Two C++ templates for Python ``set`` / ``frozenset`` two way conversions for all types.
* Two C++ templates for Python ``dict`` two way conversions for all type combinations.

These templates are fairly simple, comprehensible and, for simplicity, code generation is done with a Python script is used
to create the final 120 functions.

Hand Written Functions
=============================

There are only six non-trivial hand written functions along with a much larger of generated functions that successively
specialise these functions.

As an example, here how the function is developed that converts a Python list of ``float`` to a C++ ``std::vector<double>``.

Converting a Python tuple or list to a C++ ``std::vector<T>``
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This generic function that converts unary Python indexed containers (``tuple`` and ``list``) to a C++ ``std::vector<T>``
for any type has this signature:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template<typename T,
            int (*PyObject_Check)(PyObject *),
            T (*PyObject_Convert)(PyObject *),
            int(*PyUnaryContainer_Check)(PyObject *),
            Py_ssize_t(*PyUnaryContainer_Size)(PyObject *),
            PyObject *(*PyUnaryContainer_Get)(PyObject *, size_t)>
    int
    generic_py_unary_to_cpp_std_vector(PyObject *op, std::vector<T> &vec);

This template has these parameters:

.. list-table:: ``generic_py_unary_to_cpp_std_vector()`` template parameters.
   :widths: 20 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Template Parameter
     - Notes
   * - ``T``
     - The C++ type of the objects in the target C++ container.
   * - ``PyObject_Check``
     - A pointer to a function that checks that any ``PyObject *`` in the Python container is the correct type, for example that it is a ``bytes`` object.
   * - ``PyObject_Convert``
     - A pointer to a function that converts any ``PyObject *`` in the Python container to the C++ type, for example from ``bytes`` -> ``std::vector<char>``.
   * - ``PyUnaryContainer_Check``
     - A pointer to a function that checks that the ``PyObject *`` argument is the correct container type, for example a ``tuple``.
   * - ``PyUnaryContainer_Size``
     - A pointer to a function that returns the size of the Python container.
   * - ``PyUnaryContainer_Get``
     - A pointer to a function that gets a ``PyObject *`` from the Python container at a given index.

And the function has the following parameters.

.. list-table:: ``generic_py_unary_to_cpp_std_vector()`` parameters.
   :widths: 20 20 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type
     - Name
     - Notes
   * - ``PyObject *``
     - ``op``
     - The Python container to read from.
   * - ``std::vector<T>``
     - ``vec``
     - The C++ to write to.

The return value is zero on success or non zero if there is a runtime error.
These errors could be:

* ``PyObject *op`` is not a container of the required type.
* An member of the Python container can not be converted to the C++ type ``T`` (``PyObject_Check`` fails).

Partial Specialisation to Convert a Python list to a C++ ``std::vector<T>``
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This template can be partially specialised for converting Python *lists* of any type to C++ ``std::vector<T>``.
This is hand written code but it is trivial by wrapping a single function call.

Note the use of the function pointers to ``py_list_check``, ``py_list_len`` and ``py_list_get``.
These are thin wrappers around existing functions or macros in ``"Python.h"``.

.. code-block:: cpp

    template<
        typename T,
        int (*PyObject_Check)(PyObject *),
        T (*PyObject_Convert)(PyObject *)
    >
    int generic_py_list_to_cpp_std_vector(PyObject *op, std::vector<T> &vec) {
        return generic_py_unary_to_cpp_std_vector<
            T,
            PyObject_Check,
            PyObject_Convert,
            &py_list_check,
            &py_list_len,
            &py_list_get>(
                op, vec
            );
    }


Generated Functions
=============================

These are created by a script that takes the cartesian product of object types and container types and creates functions for each container/object.
For example, to convert a Python ``list`` of ``float`` to a C++ ``std::vector<double>`` the following are created:

A base declaration in *auto_py_convert_internal.h*:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template<typename T>
    int
    py_list_to_cpp_std_vector(PyObject *op, std::vector<T> &container);

And a concrete declaration for each C++ target type ``T`` in *auto_py_convert_internal.h*:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template <>
    int
    py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<double>(PyObject *op, std::vector<double> &container);


And the concrete definition is in *auto_py_convert_internal.cpp*:

.. code-block:: cpp

    template <>
    int
    py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<double>(PyObject *op, std::vector<double> &container) {
        return generic_py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<double, &py_float_check, &py_float_to_cpp_double>(
            op, container
        );
    }


This is the function hierarchy for the code that converts Python lists and tuples to C++ ``std::vector<T>`` for all
object types.
Here is the function hierarchy for converting lists to C++ ``std::vector<T>``:

.. code-block:: none

                                    py_unary_to_cpp_vector       <--- Hand written
                                              |
                            /--------------------------\
                            |                          |             Hand written partial
            generic_py_list_to_cpp_std_vector       tuples...    <-- specialisation
                            |                          |             (one liners).
                            |                          |
                py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<T>          ...        <-- Generated
                            |                          |
            /-------------------------------\      /-------\
            |                               |      |       |         Generated declaration
    py_list_to_cpp_std_vector<double>      ...    ...     ...    <-- and implementation
                                                                     (one liners)

Usage
------

Using the concrete function is as simple as this:

.. code-block:: cpp

    using namespace Python_Cpp_Containers;
    // Create a PyObject* representing a list of Python floats.
    PyObject *op = PyList_New(3);
    PyList_SetItem(op, 0, PyFloat_FromDouble(21.0));
    PyList_SetItem(op, 1, PyFloat_FromDouble(42.0));
    PyList_SetItem(op, 2, PyFloat_FromDouble(3.0));

    // Create the output vector...
    std::vector<double> cpp_vector;

    // Template specialisation will automatically invoke the appropriate
    // function call.
    // It will be a compile time error if the container/type function
    // is not available.
    // At run time this will return zero on success, non-zero on failure,
    // for example if op is not a Python tuple or members of op can not be
    // converted to C++ doubles.
    int err = py_list_to_cpp_std_vector(op, cpp_vector);
    // Handle error checking...

    // Now convert back.
    // Again this will be a compile time error if the C++ type is not supported.
    PyObject *new_op  = cpp_std_vector_to_py_list(cpp_vector);
    // new_op is a Python list of floats.
    // new_op will be null on failure and a Python exception will have been set.







Converting a C++ ``std::vector<T>`` to a Python tuple or list
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The generic function signature looks like this:


.. code-block:: cpp

    template<typename T,
            PyObject *(*ConvertCppToPy)(const T &),
            PyObject *(*PyUnaryContainer_New)(size_t),
            int(*PyUnaryContainer_Set)(PyObject *, size_t, PyObject *)>
    PyObject *
    generic_cpp_std_vector_to_py_unary(const std::vector<T> &vec);





Alternatives
--------------------

`Buffer protocol <https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/buffer.html>`_

`multiprocessing.shared_memory <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.shared_memory.html#module-multiprocessing.shared_memory>`_


`numpy <https://numpy.org>`_ is a common example.


.. rubric:: Footnotes
.. [#] There are four unary containers (``tuple``, ``list``, ``set``, ``frozenset``) and six types
    (``bool``, ``int``, ``float``, ``complex``, ``bytes``, ``str``).
    Each container/type combination requires two functions to give two way conversion from Python to C++ and back.
    Thus 4 (containers) * 6 (types) * 2 (way conversion) = 48 required functions.
    For ``dict`` there are five types but the key and the value can be either so 36 possible variations (any 2 out of 6).
    With two way conversion this means another 72 functions.
    This is a total of 120 functions.
